# Fenestra in hepatic epithelial cells

Portal venous and hepatic arterial blood enters the liver and flows through hepatic sinusoids to the hepatic vein which returns blood to the heart. The sinusoids are capillary-like structures between which are situated rows of hepatocytes. Sinusoidal blood is separated from hepatocytes by hepatic endothelial cells which form the capillary-like structure. Between hepatic endothelial cells and hepatocytes is a space (Space of Disse) which does not contain circulating cellular elements

Hepatic endothelia cells do not form a basement membrane. However, these cells have a unique feature. Each endothelial cell has up to 100 fenestra (holes) which are arranged in a sieve- like pattern. This feature is unique to hepatic endothelial cells. In effect, they are the only cells in the body which has  cytoplasm resembling Swiss cheese! The holes average ~120nm diameter and their number and size varies along the length of individual sinusoids.

The fenestra were first seen by Wisse using TEM and SEM. Because they resembled kitchen sieves, it was proposed that they have a sieve-like function keeping vascular cellular elements distant from hepatocytes and, at the same time, permitting bidirectional flow of nutrients, drugs, hormones and other small molecule between the system circulation and hepatocytes. Fenestra are essential for these critical physiologic processes.
 
Fenestrae also have dynamic features. Histochemical studies revealed that fenestrae have an actin ring associated with myosin 2 and an ability to contract upon stimulation with calcium, serotonin and other agonists.

## Challenging questions are:
1.	How and where do fenestrae form?
2.	What is their function? Are they important in development, adaptation to metabolic stress, neoplasia and the mobilization of hepatocyte function when needed?
3.	Can fenestra function be pharmacologically modified for therapeutic purposes?
4.	Does impaired fenestral structure contribute to chronic liver disease?

## References
1. Gatmaitan, Z and Arias, IM: Hepatic Endothelial Cell Fenestrae.  In: Cells of the Hepatic Sinusoid, Vol. 4.  Wisse, E, Knook, DL and Decker, K, eds.  The Kupffer Cell Foundation, The Netherlands  1993.
2. Gatmaitan Z, Varticovski L, Ling L, Mikkelsen R, Steffan AM, Arias IM. Studies on fenestral contraction in rat liver endothelial cells in culture. Am J Pathol. 1996 Jun;148(6):2027-41. [PMCID: PMC1861643](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1861643/pdf/amjpathol00042-0301.pdf)
3. Braet F, De Zanger R, Baekeland M, Crabbé E, Van Der Smissen P, Wisse E. Structure and dynamics of the fenestrae-associated cytoskeleton of rat liver sinusoidal endothelial cells. Hepatology. 1995 Jan;21(1):180-9.
[DOI: 10.1002/hep.1840210130](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.1840210130)
4. Adams, D., Eksteen, B. Aberrant homing of mucosal T cells and extra-intestinal manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Rev Immunol 6, 244–251 (2006). [DOI: 10.1038/nri1784](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.1840210130)
